##Getting and Cleaning Data Course Project

###Overview

The purpose of this project is to collect, manipulate, and clean data from the "Human Activity Recognition 
Using Smartphones Dataset," and ultimately prepare a tidy data set. All of the raw data used comes from the 
following publication:

Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto, Xavier Parra and Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz. A Publice Domain Dataset 
for Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones. 21th European Symposium on Artificial Neural Networks, 
Computational Intelligence and Machine Learning, ESANN 2013. Bruges, Belgium 24-26 April 2013.

This Code Book describes the information contained in the final tidy data set submitted through the Coursera 
portal (titled "run_analysis.txt") generated by the "run_analysis.R" file saved in the GitHub repository. This 
dataset is tidy in the wide form (180 rows by 68 columns) and presents the average of each variable selected 
for each activity and each subject. Per instruction, the only variables selected were those related to mean 
values or standard deviation values. This was taken to mean any variables that included "mean()" or "std()" in 
the variable names found in the "features.txt" file. Per submission instructions, "run_analysis.R" will run on 
a computer when all Samsung data files are saved in the working directory. 

Once the final tidy data set .txt file ("run_analysis.txt") is saved in the working directory, it can be read 
into R using the following code:

read.table("run_analysis.txt", header = TRUE)

If this table is read in to R, it is recommended to save the command above to a separate variable since it is
rather large. Then, the user will be able to explore the data set using other commands (head, tail, str, dim,
View, etc.) Using "View()" to look at the data presents it very nicely and neatly in RStudio. Providing the 
code to read the final .txt file into R and using "View()" to look at the data was recommended by David Hood 
in his "thoughtfulbloke" blog discussion about making grading easier for your peers for this and other 
Coursera projects (https://thoughtfulbloke.wordpress.com/2015/09/09/getting-and-cleaning-the-assignment/).

###Steps Taken

The "run_analysis" function runs without any inputs. It is designed to run when all applicable Samsung data .txt
files are in the working directory. The function begins by reading in the six Samsung files for the test and 
training subjects that are to be consolidated. The initial six files read in are:

    *subject_test.txt
    *y_test.txt
    *X_test.txt
    *subject_train.txt
    *y_train.txt
    *X_train.txt

*Step 1. Merge the training and the test sets to create one data set*

The files for the test subjects are combined using the "cbind" function, and the files for the training subjects
are combined in the same manner using "cbind". Once these steps are complete, the "rbind" function is used to 
consolidate the test and training subject records into one table (titled "tt" in the run_analysis() function).

*Step 2. Extract only the measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement.*

The "run_analysis" function reads in the "features.txt" file and uses the "grep" function to identify the 
numeric positions of all variables that include the terms "mean()" and "std()". These are then contained in a
vector titled "pos". This vector is then updated to account for the first two columns that were added before
the variables (subject and activity) when the files were merged in step 1. Now, "pos" is a numeric vector of
length 68. A subset of table "tt" titled "tt_sub" is then created to only include subject, activity, and the
variables that include "mean()" or "std()".

*Step 3. Use descriptive activity names to name the activities in the data set.*

In this step, the "run_analysis" function replaces the numeric activity labels (1-6) with descriptive activity
names. The descriptive names are:

    *Walking
    *Walking Upstairs
    *Walking Downstairs
    *Sitting
    *Standing
    *Laying

*Step 4. Appropriately label the data set with descriptive variable names.*

The "run_analysis" function initially creates a vector to include the descriptive names of the first two 
columns in the table: Subject and Activity. A second vector is created by using the grep function to find
all of the variable names in the "features.txt" file that include "mean()" or "std()". This second vector
is updated with several gsub statements that clarify the terminology used in the "features.txt" file. For
instance, instances of "Acc" are changed to "Accelerometer" and instances of "Gyro" are changed to 
"Gyroscope" in an effort to make the variable names clear and more understandable.

After the series of gsub statements are complete, the two variable name vectors are combined into one
vector and the names of the "tt_sub" table are updated to the names captured in the "vnames" vector.

*Step 5. From the data set in step 4, create a second, independent tidy data set with the average of each* 
*variable for each activity and each subject.*

In the final step, "run_analysis" uses the special operator %>% to chain together the final operations. It 
creates a "final" table that arranges tt_sub by the first two columns (Subject and Activity). It then groups
the "final" table by Subject and Activity. Finally, it summarizes the remaining variables using the "summarize_each" 
function to obtain the average of each variable for each activity and each subject. Thus, the average for 
each Subject and Activity is presented in each column, producing a table with dimensions of 180 rows by
68 columns. The function returns the "final" file.

After sourcing the "run_analysis.R" file into R, the final tidy data set was written to a .txt file using the
following command: 

write.table(run_analysis(), file = "run_analysis.txt", row.names = FALSE)

The resulting file was uploaded to the Coursera submission website.

###Data Directory

Below is a list of all of the columns/variables found in the tidy data set ("run_analysis.txt"). Variables 3-68 
have been renamed from the original "features.txt" file. Abbreviations either have been spelled out (e.g., 
"Acc" changed to "Accelerometer" and "Gyro" changed to "Gyroscope") or expanded (e.g. "std()" changed to 
"StandDev"). Numeric values in columns 3-68 of the tidy data set represent the average of each variable for 
each activity and each subject.

1. Subject
    The subject who performed the activity. Subjects are numbered 1 to 30
    
2. Activity
    Six options:

    *Walking
    *Walking Upstairs
    *Walking Downstairs
    *Sitting
    *Standing
    *Laying
    
3. Time_BodyAccelerometer_Mean_X  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tBodyAcc-mean()-X

4. Time_BodyAccelerometer_Mean_Y  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tBodyAcc-mean()-Y

5. Time_BodyAccelerometer_Mean_Z       
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tBodyAcc-mean()-Z

6. Time_BodyAccelerometer_StandDev_X   
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tBodyAcc-std()-X

7. Time_BodyAccelerometer_StandDev_Y  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tBodyAcc-std()-Y

8. Time_BodyAccelerometer_StandDev_Z  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tBodyAcc-std()-Z

9. Time_GravityAccelerometer_Mean_X     
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tGravityAcc-mean()-X

10. Time_GravityAccelerometer_Mean_Y  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tGravityAcc-mean()-Y

11. Time_GravityAccelerometer_Mean_Z  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tGravityAcc-mean()-Z

12. Time_GravityAccelerometer_StandDev_X  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tGravityAcc-std()-X

13. Time_GravityAccelerometer_StandDev_Y  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tGravityAcc-std()-Y

14. Time_GravityAccelerometer_StandDev_Z  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tGravityAcc-std()-Z

15. Time_BodyAccelerometer_JerkSignal_Mean_X  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tBodyAccJerk-mean()-X

16. Time_BodyAccelerometer_JerkSignal_Mean_Y  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tBodyAccJerk-mean()-Y

17. Time_BodyAccelerometer_JerkSignal_Mean_Z   
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tBodyAccJerk-mean()-Z

18. Time_BodyAccelerometer_JerkSignal_StandDev_X  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tBodyAccJerk-std()-X

19. Time_BodyAccelerometer_JerkSignal_StandDev_Y  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tBodyAccJerk-std()-Y

20. Time_BodyAccelerometer_JerkSignal_StandDev_Z  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tBodyAccJerk-std()-Z

21. Time_BodyGyroscope_Mean_X  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tBodyGyro-mean()-X

22. Time_BodyGyroscope_Mean_Y  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tBodyGyro-mean()-Y

23. Time_BodyGyroscope_Mean_Z  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tBodyGyro-mean()-Z

24. Time_BodyGyroscope_StandDev_X  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tBodyGyro-std()-X

25. Time_BodyGyroscope_StandDev_Y  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tBodyGyro-std()-Y

26. Time_BodyGyroscope_StandDev_Z  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tBodyGyro-std()-Z

27. Time_BodyGyroscope_JerkSignal_Mean_X  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tBodyGyroJerk-mean()-X

28. Time_BodyGyroscope_JerkSignal_Mean_Y  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tBodyGyroJerk-mean()-Y

29. Time_BodyGyroscope_JerkSignal_Mean_Z  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tBodyGyroJerk-mean()-Z

30. Time_BodyGyroscope_JerkSignal_StandDev_X  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tBodyGyroJerk-std()-X

31. Time_BodyGyroscope_JerkSignal_StandDev_Y  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tBodyGyroJerk-mean()-Y

32. Time_BodyGyroscope_JerkSignal_StandDev_Z  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tBodyGyroJerk-mean()-Z

33. Time_BodyAccelerometer_Magnitude_Mean  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tBodyAccMag-mean()

34. Time_BodyAccelerometer_Magnitude_StandDev  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tBodyAccMag-std()

35. Time_GravityAccelerometer_Magnitude_Mean  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tGravityAccMag-mean()

36. Time_GravityAccelerometer_Magnitude_StandDev  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tGravityAccMag-std()

37. Time_BodyAccelerometer_JerkSignal_Magnitude_Mean  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tBodyAccJerkMag-mean()

38. Time_BodyAccelerometer_JerkSignal_Magnitude_StandDev  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tBodyAccJerkMag-std()

39. Time_BodyGyroscope_Magnitude_Mean  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tBodyGyroMag-mean()

40. Time_BodyGyroscope_Magnitude_StandDev  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tBodyGyroMag-std()

41. Time_BodyGyroscope_JerkSignal_Magnitude_Mean  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tBodyGyroJerkMag-mean()

42. Time_BodyGyroscope_JerkSignal_Magnitude_StandDev  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: tBodyGyroJerkMag-std()

43. Frequency_BodyAccelerometer_Mean_X  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: fBodyAcc-mean()-X

44. Frequency_BodyAccelerometer_Mean_Y  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: fBodyAcc-mean()-Y

45. Frequency_BodyAccelerometer_Mean_Z  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: fBodyAcc-mean()-Z

46. Frequency_BodyAccelerometer_StandDev_X  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: fBodyAcc-std()-X

47. Frequency_BodyAccelerometer_StandDev_Y  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: fBodyAcc-std()-Y

48. Frequency_BodyAccelerometer_StandDev_Z  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: fBodyAcc-std()-Z

49. Frequency_BodyAccelerometer_JerkSignal_Mean_X  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: fBodyAccJerk-mean()-X

50. Frequency_BodyAccelerometer_JerkSignal_Mean_Y  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: fBodyAccJerk-mean()-Y

51. Frequency_BodyAccelerometer_JerkSignal_Mean_Z  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: fBodyAccJerk-mean()-Z

52. Frequency_BodyAccelerometer_JerkSignal_StandDev_X  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: fBodyAccJerk-std()-X

53. Frequency_BodyAccelerometer_JerkSignal_StandDev_Y  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: fBodyAccJerk-std()-Y

54. Frequency_BodyAccelerometer_JerkSignal_StandDev_Z  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: fBodyAccJerk-std()-Z

55. Frequency_BodyGyroscope_Mean_X  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: fBodyGyro-mean()-X

56. Frequency_BodyGyroscope_Mean_Y  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: fBodyGyro-mean()-Y

57. Frequency_BodyGyroscope_Mean_Z  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: fBodyGyro-mean()-Z

58. Frequency_BodyGyroscope_StandDev_X  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: fBodyGyro-std()-X

59. Frequency_BodyGyroscope_StandDev_Y  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: fBodyGyro-std()-Y

60. Frequency_BodyGyroscope_StandDev_Z  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: fBodyGyro-std()-Z

61. Frequency_BodyAccelerometer_Magnitude_Mean  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: fBodyAccMag-mean()

62. Frequency_BodyAccelerometer_Magnitude_StandDev  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: fBodyAccMag-std()

63. Frequency_BodyAccelerometer_JerkSignal_Magnitude_Mean  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: fBodyBodyAccJerkMag-mean()

64. Frequency_BodyAccelerometer_JerkSignal_Magnitude_StandDev  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: fBodyBodyAccJerkMag-std()

65. Frequency_BodyGyroscope_Magnitude_Mean  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: fBodyBodyGyroMag-mean()

66. Frequency_BodyGyroscope_Magnitude_StandDev  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: fBodyBodyGyroMag-std()

67. Frequency_BodyGyroscope_JerkSignal_Magnitude_Mean  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: fBodyBodyGyroJerkMag-mean()

68. Frequency_BodyGyroscope_JerkSignal_Magnitude_StandDev  
    Original variable title in Samsung dataset: fBodyBodyGyroJerkMag-std()