##Getting and Cleaning Data Course Project

The purpose of this project is to collect, manipulate, and clean data from the "Human Activity Recognition 
Using Smartphones Dataset," and ultimately prepare a tidy data set. All of the raw data used comes from the 
following publication:

Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto, Xavier Parra and Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz. A Publice Domain Dataset 
for Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones. 21th European Symposium on Artificial Neural Networks, 
Computational Intelligence and Machine Learning, ESANN 2013. Bruges, Belgium 24-26 April 2013.

There are four components to the final project submission:

	*This README.md file, which provides an overview of the project and files included
	*The final tidy data set submitted through the Coursera project submission portal
	*The R file titled "run_analysis.R" that generated the final tidy data set
	*The CodeBook.md file, which includes an overview, steps taken, and data included in the final tidy file 

The README.md file, the R file, and the CodeBook.md file are all provided in the GitHub Repository. The final
tidy data set .txt file ("run_analysis.txt") was submitted through the Coursera submission portal, so it was
not included in the GitHub Repository.

The final tidy data set generated by the "run_analysis.R" file is tidy in the wide form and includes 180
rows and 68 columns. The data set presents the average of each variable selected for each activity and each 
subject. Per instruction, the only variables selected were those related to mean values or standard deviation 
values. This was taken to mean any variables that included "mean()" or "std()" in the variable names found in 
the "features.txt" file. 

Per submission instructions, "run_analysis.R" will run on a computer when all Samsung data files are saved in 
the working directory. 

Once the final tidy data set .txt file ("run_analysis.txt") is saved in the working directory, it can be read 
into R using the following code:

read.table("run_analysis.txt", header = TRUE)

If this table is read in to R, it is recommended to save the command above to a separate variable since it is
rather large. Then, the user will be able to explore the data set using other commands (head, tail, str, dim,
View, etc.) Using "View()" to look at the data presents it very nicely and neatly in RStudio. Providing the 
code to read the final .txt file into R and using "View()" to look at the data was recommended by David Hood 
in his "thoughtfulbloke" blog discussion about making grading easier for your peers for this and other 
Coursera projects (https://thoughtfulbloke.wordpress.com/2015/09/09/getting-and-cleaning-the-assignment/).

Additional information regarding steps taken can be found in the CodeBook.md file, as well as in the comments
provided in the "run_analysis.R" file. The comments are designed to make it very clear what each step in the code 
should be accomplishing.
